Monday, August 15th, 1977.
It's about quarter to four in the afternoon. We're
talking with Thomas Ramirez Ugalde.
U-L-G-A-L-D-E.
U-G-A-L-D-E.
Okay, we're going to need to go over some of the
stuff you and I talked about beforehand, okay, so
we can get it on tape. No, that's all right. That's
okay.
Now that we're both sitting straight. Okay, I need
to know again, you were born in what year? I was born
the 29th day of December. 29th day of December,
1890. And where were you born? I was born in a coal
mine. They call it Lida, Lida, something like
that. Lida? Yeah. And where is that? That's in
Latascoso County, Texas. Texas, and near what big
city? Oh, San Antonio. San Antonio, okay. How old
were you when you moved to the Rockdale area? Well,
it was about... A little bit, but I don't remember
about eight months or ten months. Eight or ten
months. How
did you learn English? Well, I tell you, I didn't go
to school. But I learned it at the old Compras coal
mine. There was a bunch of Negroes. They come from
Alabama. And they had little kids. And I was a
little kid, and I played with them. That's the way I
learned it. I see. I see. What were your parents
doing? They were working at the coal mines. At the
coal mines. Were the Negro children's parents
working at the coal mines, too? Yeah, there was
Negro men. They came in from Alabama, and they was
working at the coal mines. Of course, a bunch of
kids, you know, we played together. Me and Austin
Garcia. Yeah. And Ben Torres. Antonio Rodriguez,
a bunch of kids. And where was the compressed coal
mines? It's right where we went into Texas, you
know, across the railroad, where the compressed
is on this side. I see, on the other side, on the
north side of Highway 79. Yes, sir. Okay. Were
there very many black people that worked the
mines? Yeah, yeah. Do any of them still live around
the Rockdale area? No, I don't think so. They all
moved away? They all moved down in the ground. What
do you mean by that? Died. They died? They died in
the mines? No, they died up in town, you see. After
the compressed mine, they worked it out, you know.
They didn't work no more. They didn't have no more
coal mines. There was most of the colored people
there moved to town. I see. And what year was that?
Do you remember? I don't remember. I was a little
fellow then. A little fellow.
Okay. Could you describe a typical week at the
mine? You know, what you did on Monday and Tuesday
and Wednesday? Well, that's all we done. That's
all you did was mine coal? Yeah. That's all we done,
coal. You were telling me earlier that you... went
down in the mines with your father. Yeah. And about
how old were you? About eight years, eight, nine
years, something like that. And why would you go
down in the mines with him? Well, just to keep
company with him. Because there was a lot of people
working, you know, but still he says, if you run
around out here, you might get in trouble with
these kids, and you just want to go stay with me down
in the coal mine. Were there many other children
your age down there? Oh, yes. Mexican and college.
I see. And how old were you when you yourself
started mining? Myself? Yeah, right. When I
started working? For the mines. Huh? Yeah, when
you started coal mining yourself. Oh, well, I
don't know. I was about, let's see, about 14. About
14. Did your parents have to sign a letter to let you
work? Signed some papers, so I didn't know.
Okay. And when you were 14, were you working at the
Vogel mine? Vogel's mine, yeah. What time of the
day would you go down into the mine? Well, it was...
They had steps going in the coal mine. And the...
Willie Helson, his father, he opened it. They had a
little door, you know, with a lock to keep people
from going in there in the night and do damage down
in the mine, you see? Right. And he opened it up
about 6 o'clock in the morning, then we... Some
people go down early, some of them went down a
little late. I see. So the miners had pretty much
free reign as to when they could go down and when
they could come up? Yeah. I see. What time did you
usually go down? Well, we usually go down about
6.30. 6.30. The people that decode for some mule
drivers and the truck man, they all started at 7
o'clock. I see. And how long would they work during
the day? They worked, I think, until 6. Until 6? I
think they were working 10 hours. 10 hours a day?
Yeah. Did they have an hour off for lunch? Yeah. I
see. Did you take your lunch down with you, or did
you come up at lunch? Well, a lot of people take
their lunch with them, a lot of them. And some of
them were the ladies. The man that had a wife,
they'd take it out to the cold, while the chef was,
you know, and put it in the elevator. At 12 o'clock,
they let all the lunch down. What was usually in a
lunch? What kind of lunch did you eat? Well, we ate
just potatoes and bacon, the things like that. And
then in the afternoon, what time would you come up
out of the coal mine? Well, the mentors, they could
come out any time. Or you could go down any time they
wanted you. And you were telling me earlier, how
many... coal cars a day did you mine using? Well,
I'll tell you. Here at this coal mine, I was not very
much of a hand, but I could dig six, five, six,
seven, eight cars of coal. And how much were you
paid per car? Twenty cents. Twenty cents? Did that
rate ever go up or down? Oh, yeah. In the
summertime, they paid 25 cents. And why was that?
Well, you see, they want the people, they had more
orders for coal, and they want the people to work
more. And they didn't want the people to get out and
go to the cotton field. That's why they get paid 25,
I mean 5 cents more on each car. And that was during
the summertime? Yes. I see. How much would you get
paid for picking cotton? Well... I don't remember
exactly. But 25 cents a coal car was more than you
would get picking cotton? Oh, yeah, yeah. Of
course, now you take some good hands and know how to
pick cotton, well, they picked a lot of cotton. And
I think they was getting about, I don't know, 50
cents per hundred, something like that. 50 cents
per hundred pounds of cotton? Okay. What kind of
machinery was there around the mines? Well, the
kind of machine they had, there was all of them
steam engines, all of them. That's what they did.
Now, to pull the, to bring the coal to the shaft,
they used mules. Inside the mine? Inside the mine,
yes. And they would put the... The coal where? I
mean, the coal car. After the mule pulled it to the
shaft, where would it go? Then they put it in the
elevator. We call them cages. Cages. Yeah. But
they put them in the elevator and bring them to the
top and dump it. And the triple, you know, and they
had a chute. A chute. And where would that chute go
to? Into the railroad car. Railroad
car. Okay. What kind of tools did you use when you
were mining? Pick and shovel, that's all he used.
That's all. One thing I've been unclear about,
Tomas, and that is, you had a straight shaft with an
elevator, or a cage, as you call it. Yeah. And then
you had one main tunnel. Yeah. And then you had
offshoots, or little rooms, off the tunnel. Yeah,
rooms, entries. Right. Were there cave-ins? Were
there very many cave-ins? Well, some of them were
cave-ins, but most of them had chambers. But for
the vein of the coal... It was about seven feet and a
half, eight feet. You know, we didn't take all the
coal off. That will hold the dirt, you know.
Leaving some of the coal would hold the dirt in
place. Did the miners put the timbers up or did
somebody else come in? No, we had to put them up
because we'd get paid 25 cents for each. For cap,
cross piece, like this, you know. This is a cross
piece and this is a prop. two props, one prop here,
one prop there, and a cross bead. Then they put
some, what they call leggings. Leggings? They
have about, some of them was three inches in
diameter, some of them less, and some of them a
little more. And we put them like that, you know, to
keep the place from caving. So, and you got paid for
doing that also? Oh yeah, yeah. 25 cents for each
set of timbers. 25 cents for each set of timbers?
Well, did that pay more than digging coal? Well,
You see, you had to put up a set of timbers about
every five feet. So you just put up one set a day. I
see. So you would get paid for maybe perhaps six car
loads a day plus one set of timber. Yes. Okay, so
that was seven times 25. Pogo,
Pogo.
Who was your boss down in the mines? Mr. Lawrence.
Mr. Lawrence? Lawrence. Did he go down in the mine?
What was his name? I think he was Gus Lawrence. Gus
Lawrence? Yeah. This Lawrence, he was the boss. He
was the boss one time, you know. But then Willie
Elson, his brother, named Frank Elson, he was the
boss then. You know, he got maybe a little hole or
something. He stayed on top. Okay. Was there any
boss down below in the mines? Just one. Just one?
Just one, yeah. And what was his function? What did
he... Just look at the places, and when you break
through from one place into another, he'd go ahead
and mark you another place. Would he tell you
where... not to go and where to go? No, he never said
that. Was he concerned with the safety of the
miners at all? Yeah. How would he be concerned with
safety? Well, the safety was because, you see,
there was not too many places in the coal mine caved
in. That was the safety. I see. There were not very
many caved in? No, no. Only when they pull the
pillars, what they call the pillars, it's from one
entry or room into another. And while the tunnel
goes in, another tunnel back here, what they call
pulling pillars, bring the whole thing, dig the
whole thing out and set a bunch of props. I see.
That's how come there's a lot of caves over there
and holes. Have you noticed it, buddy? Well, them
is why they pull the pillars out of the coal mine.
They call them pillars. Well, they wouldn't pull
the pillars out until they put the timber in.
Right. They put the timber in. Yeah, as you pull, as
you be digging, you set your property. And you
could tell it about that far apart, you know, from
the coal, about that far apart, three or four feet,
you know, you put your property. I see. Okay. And
they had a track man, too, in the coal mine. A track
man. And what did he do? He laid a track for the coal
miners. Do you remember how much he was paid? He was
paid about $2 a day. $2 a day. Was there anybody that
took care of the mules down there, a mule driver?
No. Well, how did the mules pull the cars from the
roof? We had to drive them. You had to drive the
mules yourself. I see. We had a lamp cap and a lamp, a
carbide lamp. The question was oil lamps. But then
they got the carbide lamps along about 1912. About
1912 is when the carbide lamps came in? Yeah. And
then, you see, that gives you a lot of light to drive
your mule with four, five cars, maybe six,
according to how many places they go down a little
or go up, you know? Ah, yeah, I see. And then that's
all they could pull. So you filled up one car? And
then hitched it onto a mule and took it to the cage.
Yeah. And then your car went up the cage. And they
had a place with some empty cars. Down underneath
the mine? Yeah. Okay. All right. Now, how did you
keep track of your cars? Well, they had a number,
you see, where all the coal diggers had a number.
They had a washer, you know? Brass washer? No, iron
washer. Iron washer. But they had a stamp, you
know. They had a... from one two three four five and
your number was 12 or one or two whatever your
number was then they find out that that's the way to
find out how many cars of coal you dig a day I see you
see on top of the temple there was a man dump the coal
pull the the car out of the elevator and dump it and
then when he dumps it he's down there and got got to
check out and they had a a board with a lot of nails,
and they put your watch in there, and it was your
check number. There was no cars getting lost that
way. No cars got lost? No. They never miscounted
your cars? Oh, sure, they counted them right, too.
That's good. Were you ever injured in the mines?
Huh? Were you ever injured? Did you ever have an
accident? No. Did any of your friends ever have an
accident? No, not that I know of. Well, what about
when one of your family was sick? How did you take
care of them? Well, I'll tell you. When the family
gets sick, now here's the way they had it. Each coal
mine had maybe a doctor or two from town. And every
person that was working in the coal mine, if he was
single, he paid 25 cents every two weeks for the
doctor to come and see him. And the married man,
they had family that paid 50 cents every two weeks.
And that's the way we had the doctor. Anytime we'd
get sick, something happened to the family or the
children, they called the doctor, the phone of the
doctor, and he'd go over there. You didn't have to
pay any extra? No, sir. We already was paying him 25
cents, single man, every two weeks, and 50 cents a
family man. When did you get married? I got married
in 1914. 1914. And you got married at the mine site?
Huh? Were you married at one of the mines? Or did you
get married in town? No, I got married in town. I
see. The guest of peace married me. His name was Ed
Gunn. Ed Gunn? Ed Gunn. I think he died maybe two or
three years ago. I see. Well, did you have a big
party after you were married? No. Some of them had
them, but some of them didn't. Well, but you took
your wife back to the mine camp? Oh yeah, that's
where we lived. You met her at the mines? Yeah, at
the dances, that's where we met. At the dances, I
see. Yeah, you see they had a big platform to give a
dance. Which mine was this? Most of the coal mines
had a platform. where they put up, where they
celebrate the holidays. That is the 5th of May and
the 16th of September. That's the holidays for the
Mexican people. Well, did you meet your wife at the
same camp where you were? Yeah. Okay. Back in 1914,
do you remember which coal company you were
working for? I was working for the Vogels. Vogels?
Uh-huh. And which mine area was that? Was that the
one we were looking at today? No. No, the one back in
there, we didn't get to go to the coal mine. Over by
the, near the brick factory? Yeah. That one? Okay.
Did you ever sing when you were down in the mines?
Huh? Did you ever sing songs while you were down in
the mines? Oh, yeah. What kind of songs did you
sing? Well, the same thing, you know, I'd sing,
you'd sing by yourself, because you'd be in your
own place. Can you remember one of those songs? You
can't? No.
Well, when you came out of the mines in the
afternoon, what did you do? Took a bath. Took a
bath. Took a bath, eat a little supper, and go play
ballroom. Okay. Did each house have a bathtub? No,
they were different. You see, we took a bath in that
tub. And where? In one of the ordinary tubs.
Ordinary tubs? Yeah, we didn't have no water out
there. We paid 25 cents. At first we used to pay 25
cents a barrel of water. 25 cents a barrel? Yeah. I
see. And so you'd have several people... taking
baths in one bathtub, right? Yeah, one, just one,
each one in the house, because each family had a
house. Each family had a house, and there was one
tub per house. Yeah. Okay. And of course, we had to
buy the tub, and not the same tub that we used, that
the ladies used to wash the man's clothes and wash
her clothes or the children's clothes. I see. Now,
you understand that? Right, so you washed clothes
and your body in the same bathtub. Okay. All right.
You said you played ball after? Yeah, we'd get out
and play ball too. Baseball? Yeah. What position
did you play? Oh, I played first base, shortstop,
center field. Did you have several teams per
mining camp? Oh, just one, just one. Just one? Just
one team, in fact. Of course, the other coal mines,
they had the same team, and on the Sunday, well,
that's what we do. We go up there and play ball.
Either team goes to... Next coal mine or the island
come and play with the rest of them. That's the way
we played ball. I see. Did all the family come and
watch? No. It was just for the men? Nothing but men,
that's all. Family stayed in the island. We was
funny, though. We all funny, though. It ain't like
now, see? Now, a married man at that time, our wives
stayed home. I see. Did you... Did you drink beer
while you played ball? No.
So you went dancing on Saturday night and played
baseball on Sunday? Yeah. That's generally what
happened? Sometimes, you know, we'd have a dance.
Sometimes I'd go two, three weeks and all that.
Nice. And when your wife had a baby, the doctor
would come out from town? Yeah. Would he charge you
any extra? No, sir. Did you get along with the
Vogels and the Lawrences? Oh, yeah. You see, they
stayed on their house. And it was different. They
didn't go out and see the workmen or anything like
that. They didn't risk nobody. They stayed right
in their house and raised children. And your
people stayed... Same way. Of course... And at
that time, well, the neighbors, you know,
sometimes they go and visit one each other. Not too
much. Now you can't hardly keep a wife at home. I've
been single 30 years. 30 years? Yes. Let me ask you
something, Tomas. Did you vote ever in any of the
Rockville elections? I only voted twice, that's
all. When was that? That was last year. And...
Do
you remember World War I? Oh,
yeah.
How did it affect your life in the mines? Well, I'll
tell you, I didn't go to the war because I had two
children. In the First World War, I had a Noverta
girl and a boy named Benino. He's in San Antonio.
Now, I had them two children. That's the reason I
didn't go to the war. I see. Well, did the mining
pick up during the war? Yeah, yeah. Did you get paid
any more money during the war? Well, we get a little
more money and the workforce later stayed.
What about, did the Ku Klux Klan ever come through
this area? No. Not that I know. All right, all
right. And you were telling me earlier that you
left the Vogel mines in 1925? No, the Texas, I mean
the Recluta, where we was. La Recluta. Yeah, La
Recluta. When did you come to the La Recluta? Well,
I came in there from Big Dump in 1924. I see. When did
you leave the Vogel mine first? I left the Vogel
coal mine in 1917, and I didn't come back until,
no, 1916, I think it was. I didn't come back until
19... 18, I think. What did you do for those two
years? I went to pick cotton one year and then cut
wood out in Christmas Texas. That's where my
second child was born. When did you go to work for
Big Lump? I went to work at Big Lump in 1900 and I
guess 1980. 1919.
I see. And you worked there until 1924? Yeah. When
you went back to the La Recluta? La Recluta, yeah.
Okay. Why did you leave the mines the first time?
When I left, I went to work at another coal mine. I
see. Why would you leave the first mine? Huh? Why
would you leave the first mine? Well, I just feel
like going to another place. Did they pay better
over at the other place? No. Was there better
living conditions, maybe? No, the same, but, you
know, you get tired of staying in one place and you
move to another place. I see. As long as you didn't
owe the company nothing, you're free to go
anywhere. Did you ever owe the company anything?
No. You always kept clear credit. Yeah. Like I do
here in Rockdale. I got credit at the state bank
since 1922. I
see. So every two weeks when you got paid, you
always got a little bit of cash? Oh, yeah. I see.
How did that depression affect you? Well... Did
you quit the mines during the depression, or did
you quit earlier? No.
Let's see, when the depression time comes, I was
19...
Then
I went to, in that same year, I went to pick cotton
for a fellow by the name of Albert Tinneman. He
lives up here on this street. Albert? Albert
Tinneman. It's the German people. I see. Did you
ever work for the Texas Coal Company? Yeah. You
did? Do you remember what years? Well, it was 19, I
think, the year that I worked for the Texas Gold
Company. I think it was 1911. 1911.
Yes. Was there ever a union movement in the mines?
No. Do you know why there wasn't? No. Do you like
unions? Well, I don't know nothing about the year.
So the people... from up in the north. Yeah, they
use a unit, but that's a hard coal, what you call it,
stone coal. That's a hard coal. Now this coal and
this lignite, you take it out today and let a lump
that big, or as big as my head, let it lay out in the
sun in two days, that's nothing but slack, what we
call it. It breaks all the pieces. For rain, it
breaks all the pieces. Did you ever use lignite for
fuel? Yeah, in the house. In the house, you did?
Yeah, for heating. Now, they didn't charge us for
that. We'd go to the mine and get it out of the
railroad cars and bring it home. They never did
charge us for that. I see. What kind of materials
did you get at the commissary? I mean, what?
Grocers. Yeah. Well, just everything you, 10
goods, all kinds, everything you wanted. And so
on, they had bacon, lard, beans. And how would you
purchase these, these goods? Well, they put it
down in the book. Put it down in the book. Whatever
you get, if you get two hours, the gross is 25 cents
for this and 30 or 40 cents for this other. And it's
all rolled down on the page. So when the week comes
on the Friday, they figure out how much had you or
taken out of the store, how much was you bought. And
then payday next, and the Saturday was a payday,
where they'll take it all, take all out of your
wages. They said if you made $15, well, they'd take
it out of the $15 if you only had $10 gross. That was
according to the family what you had. Where'd you
buy your clothes? Well, we'd come down and buy
them. How did you get to town? Walk. You'd walk?
Yeah. About how many miles was that? Oh, it was a
while ago. About two, three miles, maybe four.
Yeah. You told me earlier that you were able to
purchase a Model T. Yeah. When did you do that? Oh,
that was in 1900 and, let's see, about 1930.
Because the Model T was a gift to me. It was given to
you. Yeah, they gave it to a fella out in the
country, here at the Whirly Mine. He had a model to
you, and he didn't know how to fix it. So when I was at
Big Lump, a fella by the name of Harry Steinberg, he
was the pit boss of the mine at Big Lump. And many of
them got along pretty good, and I was running some
steam pumps to pump the water out of the coal mine.
And they fixed the cars for the
company. And that was Mr. Henemeyer was one of the
owners, I think, and E.B. Phillips was the other
owner. Now, didn't E.B. Phillips own the Texas
mine, the Texas coal company? I think E.B.
Phillips, I think. I think
he had a part of the coal mine in Bigelow. And I think
he did have part of Texas. I'm sorry, I interrupted
you. Nate, you learned how to work on Model Ts?
Yeah. Yeah, that's part of the law in me, you know. I
have to get through puppet. I have to get through
puppet while he says, Thomas, you want to learn how
to fix this car? I said, yeah, glad to. So I'll tell
you the truth. I learned how to fix a T-model, but I
didn't run it. I was afraid I'd break it or do
something to it, and I didn't run it. So he told me a
way. He says, Thomas, you fix them, and I help you
fix them, and we both work on it. He says, go ahead
and dry one. If you break it, we'll fix it up again.
So that's the way I learned how to fix a T-model
before I could dry it. So when this man had this
T-model, he didn't have no use for it. Well, he gave
it to me. For no money? For no money. But in a good
shape. But he is some man with, you know. Did you
ever get around to driving it? Well, sure. I drove
it from the Corpus Christi with all my family.
Corpus Christi? Yeah. It's big cotton out there.
Chopped cotton. What year? Yeah, vegetables.
What year was that? Do you remember? 1924. 1924?
Yes, sir. 1934. 1934. 1934.
The interview is continued on the other side of the
table.